---
comments: true
date: 2013-12-05 16:05:43
layout: post
slug: my-setup
title: My setup
categories:
- Personal
tag:
meta: "A brief overview of my tools and software I use for work"
---

The other day I _finally_ got a proper workspace sorted out. This is something I
knew I’d need to sort properly since working for myself, but I’d spent so much
time on the road that I’d just not had time to even think about it.

I got everything set up a couple of days ago and fired [a
tweet](https://twitter.com/csswizardry/status/408205662297292800) out about how,
for once, my desk looked presentable. I got a few replies asking me about a few
things, so I thought I’d also put together a short post about my setup and the
tools I use. I enjoy reading about other peoples’ setups, so I thought I might
as well share my own.

<figure class="annotate">
  <img src="/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/workspace.jpg" alt="My workspace"
       class="annotate__image" />
  <ul class="annotate__list">
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 28%; left:  3%; width: 35%; height: 32%;" title="13″ MacBook Air">13″ MacBook Air</li>
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 18%; left: 30%; width: 50%; height: 40%;" title="27″ Apple Thunderbolt Display">27″ Apple Thunderbolt Display</li>
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 65%; left: 37%; width: 40%; height:  8%;" title="Apple wired keyboard">Apple wired keyboard</li>
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 72%; left: 84%; width: 14%; height:  9%;" title="Apple Magic Mouse">Apple Magic Mouse</li>
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 56%; left:  5%; width: 29%; height: 17%;" title="Griffin Elevator">Griffin Elevator</li>
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 37%; left: 79%; width: 11%; height: 22%;" title="Blue Yeti microphone">Blue Yeti microphone</li>
   <li class="annotate__item" style="top: 58%; left: 80%; width: 14%; height: 14%;" title="Le Creuset mug">Le Creuset mug</li>
  </ul>
  <figcaption class="annotate__caption">
    <a href="/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/workspace--full.jpg">View full-size/quality (362KB).</a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## 13″ MacBook Air

I bought my first Air—actually my first ever Mac—back in 2011. Back then I opted
for the 11″ model which, although a great little machine, was exactly
that: _little_. I knew that, if I was going to start working for myself, I’d
need a bigger laptop. A couple of months ago I nipped out and got the 13″
Air and I haven’t looked back.

A lot of people asked if this is my primary computer, and it is. It’s fairly
modest; it has 4GB memory and 256GB of storage. My previous machine had half the
RAM and only 64GB of storage, and I never came close to running out of either.
This is largely thanks to my minimal software requirements, which I will detail
later in the post.

The beauty of the Air, for me, is its sheer portability; it weighs next to
nothing and it’s barely noticeable in any bag I might carry it in. As I tend to
be on the move a lot, this is vital. The majority of my clients and engagements
have been overseas, and having a light machine has been really important. It’s
also perfect for taking to-and-from conferences and workshops, and as I often
like to work from coffee shops (as I am right now), being able to pack up and
move at the drop of a hat is really important.

Another great thing about the new Airs is the improved battery life; I can do a
full day’s work on this machine without needing to plug it in once. Amazing!

In all, it’s a quality machine that I can take everywhere (and, believe me, I
do).

Link: [apple.com/macbook-air](http://www.apple.com/macbook-air/)

## 27″ Thunderbolt Display

One of the first things CSS Wizardry Ltd. spent some money on was a decent
display. For all the Air is perfect when hopping about, it’s a little
cramped—not not to mention unhealthy—to work on as-is when I’m stationary.

The extra real estate is great, and feels a real luxury. The quality of the
screen goes some way to helping justify the price, and I particularly love that
the Thunderbolt allows me to connect more than just ‘a display’. Not cheap but,
so far, worth every penny.

Link: [apple.com/displays](http://www.apple.com/displays/)

## Apple wired keyboard

I needed a decent keyboard and just decided to go for the Apple wired one. I
_have_ to have a numeric keypad, so the wireless version wasn’t really an
option for me. I’ve always loved how MacBook keyboards feel to type on, but I
feel that the dedicated keyboards just don’t quite feel the same. I feel like
there isn’t enough ‘feedback’, and that I’m almost typing on a flat surface. I
don’t love it, but I’m getting used to it.

Link: [store.apple.com](http://store.apple.com/us/product/MB110LL/B/apple-keyboard-with-numeric-keypad-english-usa)

## Magic Mouse

As with the keyboard, I’m not totally sold on Apple’s mouse yet, either. It’s
lovely to look at, and the gestures are great (I’ve always loved the MacBooks’
trackpad gestures), but it feels a little too flat. From a pure comfort point of
view, I’m surprised that this mouse was ever made (or perhaps I’m just holding
it wrong); it doesn’t seem to fit anywhere in my hand. I’m getting used to it,
and the gestures are a major selling point, but it’s not the comfiest thing in
the world. Luckily I spend most of my time in Terminal, specifically Vim, where
there is no concept of a mouse anyway.

Link: [apple.com/magicmouse](http://www.apple.com/magicmouse/)

## Griffin Elevator

I love this stand. The only reason I know it exists is because we used to use
them at Sky, and they’re so functional and affordable that I couldn’t ask for
anything else. I got this for just over £20 on Amazon and it does its job
perfectly. It’s not the prettiest thing in the world, but it doesn’t need to be;
it holds my laptop up off the desk, nothing more, nothing less.

Link: [griffintechnology.com/elevator](http://store.griffintechnology.com/elevator)

## Blue Yeti microphone

I picked this up for client calls and podcasts. Usually they’re pretty expensive
but I happened to spot one out and about at a cut price, so I took advantage of
the special offer. It’s simple to use, but would have definitely been overkill
for my needs at full price. Unless you plan to host a podcast, you can probably
manage with something much cheaper or—as I did—only get one of these if you
spot them discounted somewhere.

Link: [bluemic.com/yeti](http://bluemic.com/yeti/)

## Le Creuset mug

I love this mug. Matte black finish, nothing written on it, just a humble, plain
mug for the copious amounts of tea and coffee I seem to get through.
[Naomi](https://twitter.com/naomisusi) has the white version.

Link: [lecreuset.co.uk/Stoneware-Mugs](http://www.lecreuset.co.uk/Stoneware-Mugs.aspx#.UqCcb2RdWuo)

---

{% include promo-case-studies.html %}

---

## Software

As I hinted at earlier, my software requirements are _incredibly_ lean. To do my
job the only applications I really ever need are Terminal and Chrome. Of course,
Terminal is a broad way of covering a lot more software, so I’ll outline that
stuff below.

### iTerm2

When I say I use Terminal, I really use iTerm2. It’s like OSX’s regular Terminal
but on steroids. I do _everything_ in here; I traverse the filesystem, I write
code, I use Git, I move files around, you name it. I rarely find myself in
Finder any more these days; I can handle 99% of my requirements from the
command line.

Link: [iterm2.com](http://www.iterm2.com/)

### Chrome

Chrome is my browser of choice, and I use it for everything internetty (except
browser testing, naturally).

Link: [google.com/chrome](https://www.google.com/intl/en/chrome/browser/)

### Vim

I write all my code in Vim, from the command line. In fact, I’m actually writing
this article in Vim right now.

Link: [vim.org](http://www.vim.org/)

### Git

Naturally all my work is version controlled, and for this I use Git. I also run
Git from the command line, which I’m glad I started doing; I feel it’s really
improved my Git knowledge, instead of hiding everything in a black box behind
some GUI.

Link: [git-scm.com](http://git-scm.com/)

### Photoshop

See below.

### iA Writer

I fell in love with iA Writer as soon as it was announced. As someone who does a
lot of writing, I find it invaluable. I wrote my section of [the latest
Smashing Book](https://shop.smashingmagazine.com/smashing-book-4-new-perspectives-on-web-design.html)
in iA Writer, I write out long emails in iA Writer, I usually write out blog
posts in iA Writer. I _love_ it. Simple, hassle free writing.

Link: [iawriter.com/mac](http://www.iawriter.com/mac/)

---

## Services

I also make use of a few vital services. These are critical to my everyday work,
and are all _incredibly_ cheap.

### Photoshop

I usually have to use Photoshop every now and again, and I’m subscribed to
Adobe’s Creative Cloud service. This service is one of the best things that
Adobe has done in recent years; making powerful software affordable. I couldn’t
wait to give them my money when they announced their rolling, subscription
pricing model.

Link: [adobe.com/products/creativecloud](http://www.adobe.com/uk/products/creativecloud.html)

### Spotify

I love music (I can’t make it, but I love consuming it) so I have Spotify on
perhaps 12 hours a day. I can’t work without music, and Spotify is the most
reasonable £10/mo I spend. They could triple the cost for all I’m concerned, it
is such a great value service and is a vital part of my life.

Link: [spotify.com](https://www.spotify.com/)

### Dropbox

All of my files (although there aren’t very many) are on Dropbox. Such a simple,
effective and vital piece of kit that I am always happy to pay for.

Link: [dropbox.com](https://www.dropbox.com/)

### GitHub

All of my remote repositories are kept on GitHub. I have a private account in
which I keep a few closed-source projects (client stuff, workshop files, etc.).
GitHub is an incredible service, for me personally, but also for the internet as
a whole. Who can remember a life before GitHub? I can’t…

Link: [github.com](https://github.com/)

---

So that’s my setup; pretty humble, pretty lean. There will be some things I’ve
missed, but they’re so infrequently used that I’d not consider them part of my
core setup at all.
